DOCS-534: Refactor Orientation Vector (#997)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/internals/orientation-vector.md

---

> title: "Poses and Orientation Vectors"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Orientation Vector"
```

> linkTitle: "Pose"

Reviewer: Currently, this doc only covers orientation vector. If we want to cover all of pose (including the position part), more needs to be added. https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/components/arm/index.html#viam.components.arm.Pose

Author: Gotcha I'll change it back.

> linkTitle: "Pose"

Author: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Orientation Vector"
```

- Theta - describes the angular position around that vector.

## Examples

### Configuring frame for a camera

- You have a room with a camera.
- The corner of the room is (0,0,0).
- You want to configure the camera into the frame system, so you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.
- This requires a Pose.
- X, Y, Z are simply the measurements from the corner of the room.
- Now to figure out the orientation vector:
  - To figure out RX, RY, RZ first take a picture with the camera.
  - Determine the point in the very center of the image.
  - Measure the X, Y, Z of that point from the corner (call them X2, Y2, Z2, respectively).
  - RX, RY, RZ become the difference between X, Y, Z (the camera's position) and X2, Y2, Z2 (that point's position).
  - Theta is determined by looking at the picture and changing Theta's value until down is correct, likely 0, 90 or 180.
    - To do this, take a picture
    - Determine if the orientation is correct
    - If not, add 90 to Theta, and try again
![camera example](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

## Why we like it

- Easy to measure in the real world
- No protractor needed

> - Rotation is pulled out (as Theta) which is often used independently and measured independently.

Reviewer: This seems useful, and honestly reading through it might help folks contextualize the potentially confusing information they just tried to digest. Could change the name to "Why Viam uses orientation vectors" or something

> A _Pose_ specifies where an object is with respect to another reference point and where it is pointing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _pose_ specifies where an object is with respect to another reference point and which direction it is pointing.
Pose includes a 3D vector specifying the position of the center of the object, as well as an *orientation vector* specifying the angle of the object in 3D space.
```

> To specify where an object is you use an orientation vector (**RX, RY, RZ**) that describes the difference between the center of the object and another reference frame.
> To specify where an object is pointing, you use **theta** which describes the angular position of the object around that vector.

Reviewer: This is incorrect. Orientation vector includes ox, oy, oz and theta, and specifies the direction in which an object is pointing as well as the angle it's rotated at about the axis along which is is pointing. If you want to talk about the position of an object, you need the other three components of pose, not just orientation vector.
```suggestion
To specify which direction an object is pointing, you use an orientation vector (**OX, OY, OZ, theta**).
The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.
```

> The corner of the room is (0,0,0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).
```

> ![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

Reviewer: We should really fix this diagram to be less wrong :) It currently looks like the points are at either (3, 1, 0) or (4, 1, 1) and (5, 6, 2) ish

Reviewer: Sorry idk what I was thinking about the camera being at 5, 6, 2--it originally did look like it could indeed be at 5, 4, 2. But the green dot is definitely wrong. See new comment on the image file.

Author: lol true - I was not thinking

Author: Fixed!

Author: Maybe at a later stage ☺️

> 3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (5,4,2) - (0, 0, 0) = (5, 4, 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (5, 4, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (5, 4, 2).
```
also nit

> 3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (5,4,2) - (0, 0, 0) = (5, 4, 2).

Reviewer: I mean, if you're just talking about orientation, units don't matter because a vector's direction is independent of its magnitude. A vector of [5 meters, 4 meters, 2 meters] is pointing in the exact same direction as a vector of [5 inches, 4 inches, 2 inches].

> If your camera is perpendicular to one of the axes of your Frame system, you can test the correct value by using 0, 90, 180, or 270 for Theta and checking if the orientation of the picture is correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your camera is perpendicular to one of the axes of your Frame system, you can test the correct value by using 0, 90, 180, or 270 degrees for Theta and checking if the orientation of the picture is correct.
```
Honestly I think the previous how-to oriented part about theta determination was easier to use/understand

Author: how about:
```suggestion
To determine Theta, look at the picture and change the value to 0, 90, 180, or 270 until the orientation of the picture is correct.
```

Reviewer: The perpendicular part is still important because if it's not perpendicular to any of the axes, a different degree value would be necessary (and it would be harder to determine)

Author: ```suggestion
If your camera is perpendicular to one of the axes of your Frame system, 
you can determine Theta by looking at the picture and changing the value to 0, 90, 180, or 270 until the orientation of the picture is correct.
```

>  RX, RY, RZ, and Theta together form the _Pose_ which defines the camera's position and where it is pointing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 RX, RY, RZ, and Theta together form the orientation vector which defines which direction the camera is pointing with respect to the corner of the room, as well as to what degree the camera is rotated about an axis through the center of its lens.
```

linkTitle: "Orientation Vector"
weight: 10
type: "docs"
description: "A description of Viam's orientation vector object."
---

> An _orientation vector_ specifies the angle at which an object is oriented in 3D space.

Reviewer 2: "angle" is the wrong term here. Maybe "specifies the orientation of an object in 3d space"?

> An _orientation vector_ specifies the angle at which an object is oriented in 3D space.

Author: ```suggestion
An _orientation vector_ specifies the orientation of an object in 3D space.
```

You use orientation vectors to specify relative orientations of components when using the [Motion Service](../../services/motion/) and [Frame System](../../services/frame-system/).
The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.

## Example: A camera in a room

Imagine you have a room with a camera.
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).

To configure the camera into the frame system, you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.

![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

> **(RX, RY, RZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

Reviewer 2: We've updated these internally to OX, OY, OZ

> **(RX, RY, RZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

Author: ```suggestion
**(OX, OY, OZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:
```

1. Determine the starting point.
   In this case it is (0, 0, 0).
2. Determine the position of the camera.
   In this case it is (3, 5, 2).

> 3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (3, 5, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (3, 5, 2).

Reviewer 2: When the user provides an OV like this, it will work, but it will internally be normalized to the unit sphere; so that's what they will see in outputs, not the orientation they put in. Should we mention that here?

Reviewer 2: Actually, the description of the math here doesn't match up with what we're demonstrating in the diagram (and is backwards as well; we subtract the camera position from the observed point, not the other way around).

In the diagram, we're trying to describe the OV of a camera at (3,5,2) that's looking at point (3,1,1).

So it would be:
- Determine the position of the camera (3,5,2)
- Determine the position of a point that the camera can see, for example (3,1,1)
- Subtract the camera point from the observed point to get the OV of the camera: (3,1,1) - (3,5,2) = (0,-4,-1)

(0,-4,-1) normalizes to (0,-0.97, -0.24)

> **Theta** describes the angle of the camera.

Author: ```suggestion
**Theta** describes the angle of rotation of the camera around the calculated vector.
If you are familiar with the pitch-roll-yaw system, you can think of theta as _roll_.
```

> **Theta** describes the angle of the camera.

Reviewer 2: "angle of rotation of the camera around the vector calculated above."

Maybe mention you can think of theta as "roll" in a pitch-roll-yaw system?

If your camera is perpendicular to one of the axes of your Frame system, 
you can determine Theta by looking at the picture and changing the value to 0, 90, 180, or 270 until the orientation of the picture is correct.

>  RX, RY, RZ, and Theta together form the orientation vector which defines which direction the camera is pointing with respect to the corner of the room, as well as to what degree the camera is rotated about an axis through the center of its lens.

Author: ```suggestion
 OX, OY, OZ, and Theta together form the orientation vector which defines which direction the camera is pointing with respect to the corner of the room, as well as to what degree the camera is rotated about an axis through the center of its lens.
```

linkTitle: "Orientation Vector"
weight: 10
type: "docs"
description: "A description of Viam's orientation vector object."
---

An _orientation vector_ specifies the orientation of an object in 3D space.
You use orientation vectors to specify relative orientations of components when using the [Motion Service](../../services/motion/) and [Frame System](../../services/frame-system/).
The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.

## Example: A camera in a room

Imagine you have a room with a camera.
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).

To configure the camera into the frame system, you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.

![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

**(OX, OY, OZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

1. Determine the starting point.
   In this case it is (0, 0, 0).
2. Determine the position of the camera.
   In this case it is (3, 5, 2).
3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (3, 5, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (3, 5, 2).

> **Theta** describes the angle of rotation of the camera around the calculated vector.

Author: ```suggestion
{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
When you provide an orientation vector to Viam, Viam normalizes it to the unit sphere.
Therefore the output you see may be different.
{{< /alert >}}

**Theta** describes the angle of rotation of the camera around the calculated vector.
```

You use orientation vectors to specify relative orientations of components when using the [Motion Service](../../services/motion/) and [Frame System](../../services/frame-system/).
The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.

## Example: A camera in a room

Imagine you have a room with a camera.
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).

To configure the camera into the frame system, you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.

![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

**(OX, OY, OZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

1. Determine the position of the camera (3,5,2)
2. Determine the position of a point that the camera can see, for example (3,1,1)
3. Subtract the camera point from the observed point to get the OV of the camera: (3,1,1) - (3,5,2) = (0,-4,-1)

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
When you provide an orientation vector to Viam, Viam normalizes it to the unit sphere.

> Therefore if you enter (3,5,2), Viam stores it internally and displays it to you as (0.49, 0.81, 0.32).

Reviewer 2: This didn't get updated with the corrected OV; should be

> When you provide an orientation vector to Viam, Viam normalizes it to the unit sphere. Therefore if you enter (0, -4, -1), Viam stores it internally and displays it to you as (0,-0.97, -0.24).

> Therefore if you enter (3,5,2), Viam stores it internally and displays it to you as (0.49, 0.81, 0.32).

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore if you enter (0, -4, -1), Viam stores it internally and displays it to you as (0,-0.97, -0.24).
```

To specify which direction an object is pointing, you use an orientation vector (**OX, OY, OZ, theta**).
The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.

## Example: A camera in a room

Imagine you have a room with a camera.
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).

To configure the camera into the frame system, you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.

![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

**(RX, RY, RZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

1. Determine the starting point.
   In this case it is (0, 0, 0).
2. Determine the position of the camera.
   In this case it is (5, 4, 2).
3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (5, 4, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (5, 4, 2).

**Theta** describes the angle of the camera.
If your camera is perpendicular to one of the axes of your Frame system, you can test the correct value by using 0, 90, 180, or 270 for Theta and checking if the orientation of the picture is correct.

>  RX, RY, RZ, and Theta together form the orientation vector which defines which direction the camera is pointing with respect to the corner of the room, as well as to what degree the camera is rotated about an axis through the center of its lens.

Author: ```suggestion
 RX, RY, RZ, and Theta together form the orientation vector which defines which direction the camera is pointing with respect to the corner of the room, as well as to what degree the camera is rotated about an axis through the center of its lens.

## Why Viam uses orientation vectors

- Easy to measure in the real world
- No protractor needed
- Rotation is pulled out as Theta which is often used independently and measured independently

```

type: "docs"

> description: "A description of Viam's orientation vector method."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "A description of Viam's orientation vector object."
```
Not sure technical correctness but method seems wrong

---

> A _pose_ specifies where an object is with respect to another reference point and which direction it is pointing.
> Pose includes a 3D vector specifying the position of the center of the object, as well as an _orientation vector_ specifying the angle of the object in 3D space.
> To specify which direction an object is pointing, you use an orientation vector (**OX, OY, OZ, theta**).

Reviewer: If this doc is continuing to be limited to orientation vector and not all of pose, we could simplify this:
```suggestion
An _orientation vector_ specifies the angle at which an object is oriented in 3D space.
```
I'm assuming people will be coming to this page from links from motion planning or arm or whatever, so they'll be likely to have the context that they'll be using this for motion. (I wouldn't make this assumption generally but because this one is in the appendix maybe it's a bit safer to assume?) If this is not a safe assumption, perhaps something like:
```suggestion
An _orientation vector_ specifies the angle at which an object is oriented in 3D space.
You use orientation vectors to specify relative orientations of components when using the [Motion Service](../../services/motion/) and [Frame System](../../services/frame-system/).
```
If it's used in camera or vision maybe link to the relevant section there too?

The first three components of this vector form an axis pointing in the same direction as the object.
**Theta** specifies the angle of the object's rotation about that axis.

## Example: A camera in a room

Imagine you have a room with a camera.
The corner of the room is (0, 0, 0).

To configure the camera into the frame system, you need to know where in the room the camera is, and where it's pointing.

![A camera in a 3D space](../img/vector/orientation-vector-camera.png)

**(RX, RY, RZ)** are defined by measurements starting from the corner of the room to the camera:

1. Determine the starting point.
   In this case it is (0, 0, 0).

> 2. Determine the position of the camera.
>    In this case it is (5, 4, 2).
> 3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (5, 4, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (5, 4, 2).

Author: ```suggestion
2. Determine the position of the camera.
   In this case it is (3, 5, 2).
3. Subtract the starting point from the position of the camera: (3, 5, 2) - (0, 0, 0) = (3, 5, 2).
```
